
<h4><a id="PREFATORY_NOTE" name="PREFATORY_NOTE">PREFATORY NOTE</a></h4>
<p>No apology is necessary for offering to American readers a play which
critics, with singular unanimity, have called one of the most original
productions seen on the modern stage. In less than a year's time, "Six
Characters in Search of an Author" has won a distinguished place in the
dramatic literature of the Western world, attracting audiences and
engaging intellects far removed from the particular influences which
made of it a season's sensation in Italy.</p>
<p>Yet the word "original" is not enough, unless we embrace under that
characterization qualities far richer than those normally credited to
the "trick" play. The "Six Characters" is something more than an
unusually ingenious variation of the "play within a play." It is
something more than a new twist given to the "dream character" made
familiar by the contemporary Italian grotesques. It is a dramatization
of the artistic process itself, in relation to the problem of reality
and unreality, which has engaged Pirandello in one way or another for
more than twenty years.</p>
<p>I venture to insist upon this point as against those observers who have
tried to see in the "Six Characters" an ironical satire of the
commercial drama, as we know it today, mixed, more or less artificially,
with a rather obvious philosophy of neo-idealism. No such mixture
exists. The blend is organic. The object of Pirandello's bitter irony is
not the stage-manager, nor the theatrical producer, nor even the
dramatic critic: it is the dramatist; it is the artist; it is, in the
end, life itself.</p>
<p>I suppose the human soul presents no mysteries to those who have been
thoroughly grounded in the science of Freud. But in spite of
psycho-analysis a few Hamlets still survive. Pirandello is one of them.</p>
<p>What are people really like? In the business of everyday life, nothing
is commoner than the categorical judgment sweeping and assured in its
affirmatives. But as we cut a little deeply into the living matter of
the spirit, the problem becomes more complicated. Do we ever understand
the whole motivation of an action—not in others only but even in
ourselves?</p>
<p>Oh, yes, there are people who <i>know</i>.... The State knows, with its laws
and its procedures. And society knows, with its conventions. And
individuals know, with their formulas for conduct often cannily applied
with reference to interest.—The ironical element, as everyone has
noted, is fundamental in Pirandello!</p>
<p>Apart from works in his earlier manner (realistic pictures from Southern
Italian life, including such gems as "Sicilian Limes"), Pirandello's
most distinctive productions have dealt with this general theme. No one
of them, indeed, exhausts it. And how could this be otherwise?
Pirandello, approaching the sixties, to be sure, is nevertheless in
spirit a man of the younger Italian generation, which, trained by Croce
and Gentile, has "learned how to think." But however great his delight
in playing with "actual idealism," he knows the difference between a
drama and a philosophical dissertation. His plays are situations
embodying conclusions, simple, or indeed "obvious" in their
convincingness. They must be taken as a whole—if one would look for a
full statement of Pirandello's "thought."</p>
<p>A "thought," moreover, which may or may not invite us to profound
reflection. Enough for the lover of the theatre is the fact that
Pirandello derives the most interesting dramatic possibilities from it.
Sometimes it is the "reality" which society sees brought into contrast
with the reality which action proves (<i>Il piacere dell'onestà</i>). Again,
it is the "reality" which a man sees in himself thwarted by the reality
which actually controls (<i>"Ma non è una cosa seria"</i>). In "Right You
Are" (<i>Così è, se vi pare</i>) we have a general satire of the "cocksure,"
who, placed in the presence of reality and unreality, are unable to
distinguish one from the other.</p>
<p>In the "Six Characters" it is the turn of the artist. Can art—creative
art, where the spirit would seem most autonomous—itself determine
reality? No, because once "a character is born, he acquires such an
independence, even of his own author, that he can be imagined by
everybody in situations where the author never dreamed of placing him,
and so acquires a meaning which the author never thought of giving him."
In this lies the great originality of this very original play—the
discovery (so Italian, when one thinks of it, and so novel, as one
compares it with the traditional rôle of the "artist" in the European
play) that the laborious effort of artistic creation is itself a
dramatic theme—so unruly, so assertive, is this thing called "life"
ever rising to harass and defeat anyone who would interpret,
crystallize, devitalize it.</p>
<p>And beyond the drama lies the poetry, a poetry of mysterious symbolism
made up of terror, and rebellion, and pity, and human kindliness. Let us
not miss the latter, especially, in the complex mood of all Pirandello's
theatre.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>The three plays of Pirandello, here offered in translations that do not
hope to be adequate, are famous specimens of the "new" theatre in Italy.
The term "new" is much contested, not only in Italy but abroad. In using
the word here it is not necessary to claim that this young, impulsive,
fascinatingly boisterous after-the-war Italy is doing things that no one
else ever thought of doing. We remain on safe ground if we assert that
Pirandello and his associates have broken the bounds set to the old
fashioned "sentimental" Latin play.</p>
<p>The motivations of the "old" theatre were largely ethical in character,
developing spiritual crises from the conflict of impulses with a rigid
framework of law and convention. Dramatic art was, so to speak, a
department of geometry, dealing with this or that projection or
modification of the triangle. Husbands tearing their hair as wives
proved unfaithful; disappointed lovers pining in eternal fidelity to
mates beyond their social sphere; cuckolds heroically sheathing the
stiletto in deference to a higher law of respectability; widows sending
second-hand aspirants to suicide that the sacrament of marriage might
remain inviolate:—such were the themes.</p>
<p>And there is no doubt, besides, that this "old" theatre produced works
of great beauty and intenseness; since the will in conflict with impulse
and triumphing over impulse always presents a subject entrancing in
human interest and noble in moral implications.</p>
<p>But the potentialities of drama are more numerous than the permutations
of three. The "new" theatre in Italy is "new" in this discovery at
least.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>"'Henry IV.,'" an equally strong and original variation of the insanity
motive, is the first of two plays by Pirandello dealing with a special
aspect of the problem of reality and unreality. The second, not yet
given to the public, is <i>Vestire gli ingnudi</i> ("... And ye clothed
me!"). In the former Pirandello studies a situation where an individual
finds a world of unreality thrust upon him, voluntarily reassuming it
later on, when tragedy springs from the deeper reality. In "And ye
clothed me!" we have a girl who, to fill an empty life of no importance,
creates a fiction for herself, only to find it torn violently from her
and to be left in a naked reality that is, after all, so unreal.</p>
<p>These two plays indicate the present tendency of Pirandello's rapid
production—a tendency that promises even richer results as this
interesting author delves more extensively into the mysteries of
individual psychology.</p>
<p>"'Henry IV.,'" meanwhile, is before us. It can speak for itself.</p>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p>All of Pirandello's plays are built for acting, and only incidentally
for reading. We make this observation with "Right You Are" especially in
mind, since that play, above all, is a test for the actor. It is typical
of Pirandello for its rapidity, its harshness and its violence—the
skill with which the tense tableau is drawn out of pure dialectic, pure
"conversation." Moreover, it states a fundamental preoccupation of
Pirandello in peculiarly lucid and striking fashion. Perhaps a better
rendering of the title <i>Così è (se vi pare)</i> will occur to many. Ludwig
Lewisohn (happily, I thought) suggested "As You Like It," no less. A
possibility, quite in the spirit of Pirandello's title in general, would
have been another Shakespearean reminiscence: "... and Thinking Makes It
So." We have kept something approximating the literal, which would be:
"So it is (if you think so)."</p>
<p>The text of the "Six Characters" is that of the translation designated
by the author and which was used in the sensational productions of the
play given in London and New York.</p>
<p>A.L.</p>

<h3><a id="SIX_CHARACTERS_IN_SEARCH_OF_AN_AUTHOR" name="SIX_CHARACTERS_IN_SEARCH_OF_AN_AUTHOR">SIX CHARACTERS IN SEARCH OF AN AUTHOR</a></h3>
<h4>(<i>Sei personaggi in cerca d'autore</i>)</h4>
<h5>A COMEDY IN THE MAKING</h5>
<h5>BY</h5>
<h4>LUIGI PIRANDELLO</h4>
<h5>TRANSLATED BY EDWARD STORER</h5>
<hr class="r5"/>
<blockquote class="quote">
<p>CHARACTERS OF THE COMEDY IN THE MAKING:</p>
<p>THE FATHER. THE MOTHER. THE STEP-DAUGHTER.
THE SON. THE BOY. THE CHILD. (<i>The last
two do not speak</i>.) MADAME PACE.</p>
<p>ACTORS OF THE COMPANY</p>
<p>THE MANAGER. LEADING LADY. LEADING MAN.
SECOND LADY. LEAD. L'INGÉNUE. JUVENILE
LEAD. OTHER ACTORS AND ACTRESSES.
PROPERTY MAN. PROMPTER. MACHINIST.
MANAGER'S SECRETARY. DOOR-KEEPER.
SCENE-SHIFTERS.</p>
<p>DAYTIME. THE STAGE OF A THEATRE.</p>
</blockquote>
<hr class="r5"/>
<h4>SIX CHARACTERS IN SEARCH OF AN AUTHOR</h4>
<h4>A COMEDY IN THE MAKING</h4>
<h4>ACT I.</h4>
<blockquote>
<p><i>N.B. The Comedy is without acts or scenes. The performance
is interrupted once, without the curtain being lowered, when
the manager and the chief characters withdraw to arrange the
scenario. A second interruption of the action takes place
when, by mistake, the stage hands let the curtain down.</i></p>
<p><i>The spectators will find the curtain raised and the stage
as it usually is during the day time. It will be half dark,
and empty, so that from the beginning the public may have
the impression of an impromptu performance.</i></p>
<p><i>Prompter's box and a small table and chair for the
manager.</i></p>
<p><i>Two other small tables and several chairs scattered about
as during rehearsals.</i></p>
<p><i>The actors and actresses of the company enter from the back
of the stage:</i></p>
<p><i>first one, then another, then two together: nine or ten in
all. They are about to rehearse a Pirandello play</i>: Mixing
It Up. <i>Some of the company move off towards their dressing
rooms. The prompter who has the "book" under his arm, is
waiting for the manager in order to begin the rehearsal.</i></p>
<p><i>The actors and actresses, some standing, some sitting, chat
and smoke. One perhaps reads a paper; another cons his
part.</i></p>
<p><i>Finally, the Manager enters and goes to the table prepared
for him: His secretary brings him his mail, through which he
glances. The prompter takes his seat, turns on a light, and
opens the "book."</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>throwing a letter down on the table</i>). I can't
see (<i>to Property Man</i>). Let's have a little light, please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. Yes sir, yes, at once (<i>a light comes down on
to the stage</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>clapping his hands</i>). Come along! Come along!
Second act of "Mixing it Up" (<i>sits down</i>).</p>
<p>(<i>The actors and actresses go from the front of the stage to
the wings, all except the three who are to begin the
rehearsal</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE PROMPTER</span> (<i>reading the "book"</i>). "Leo Gala's house. A
curious room serving as dining-room and study."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Property Man</i>). Fix up the old red room.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span> (<i>noting it down</i>). Red set. All right!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE PROMPTER</span> (<i>continuing to read from the "book"</i>). "Table
already laid and writing desk with books and papers.
Book-shelves. Exit rear to Leo's bedroom. Exit left to
kitchen. Principal exit to right."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>energetically</i>). Well, you understand: The
principal exit over there; here, the kitchen. (<i>Turning to
actor who is to play the part of Socrates</i>). You make your
entrances and exits here. (<i>To Property Man</i>) The baize
doors at the rear, and curtains.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span> (<i>noting it down</i>). Right oh!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span> (<i>reading as before</i>). "When the curtain rises, Leo
Gala, dressed in cook's cap and apron is busy beating an egg
in a cup. Philip, also dressed as a cook, is beating another
egg. Guido Venanzi is seated and listening."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span> (<i>to manager</i>). Excuse me, but must I absolutely
wear a cook's cap?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>annoyed</i>). I imagine so. It says so there
anyway (<i>pointing to the "book"</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. But it's ridiculous!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>jumping up in a rage</i>). Ridiculous?
Ridiculous? Is it my fault if France won't send us any more
good comedies, and we are reduced to putting on Pirandello's
works, where nobody understands anything, and where the
author plays the fool with us all? (<i>The actors grin. The
Manager goes to Leading Man and shouts</i>). Yes sir, you put
on the cook's cap and beat eggs. Do you suppose that with
all this egg-beating business you are on an ordinary stage?
Get that out of your head. You represent the shell of the
eggs you are beating! (<i>Laughter and comments among the
actors</i>). Silence! and listen to my explanations, please!
(<i>To Leading Man</i>): "The empty form of reason without the
fullness of instinct, which is blind."—You stand for
reason, your wife is instinct. It's a mixing up of the
parts, according to which you who act your own part become
the puppet of yourself. Do you understand?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. I'm hanged if I do.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Neither do I. But let's get on with it. It's
sure to be a glorious failure anyway. (<i>Confidentially</i>):
But I say, please face three-quarters. Otherwise, what with
the abstruseness of the dialogue, and the public that won't
be able to hear you, the whole thing will go to hell. Come
on! come on!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span>. Pardon sir, may I get into my box? There's a bit
of a draught.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, yes, of course!</p>
<p><i>At this point, the door-keeper has entered from the stage
door and advances towards the manager's table, taking off
his braided cap. During this manoeuvre, the Six Characters
enter, and stop by the door at back of stage, so that when
the door-keeper is about to announce their coming to the
Manager, they are already on the stage. A tenuous light
surrounds them, almost as if irradiated by them—the faint
breath of their fantastic reality.</i></p>
<p><i>This light will disappear when they come forward towards
the actors. They preserve, however, something of the dream
lightness in which they seem almost suspended; but this does
not detract from the essential reality of their forms and
expressions.</i></p>
<p><i>He who is known as</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> <i>is a man of about</i> 50:
<i>hair, reddish in colour, thin at the temples; he is not
bald, however; thick moustaches, falling over his still
fresh mouth, which often opens in an empty and uncertain
smile. He is fattish, pale; with an especially wide
forehead. He has blue, oval-shaped eyes, very clear and
piercing. Wears light trousers and a dark jacket. He is
alternatively mellifluous and violent in his manner.</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> <i>seems crushed and terrified as if by an
intolerable weight of shame and abasement. She is dressed in
modest black and wears a thick widow's veil of crêpe. When
she lifts this, she reveals a wax-like face. She always
keeps her eyes downcast.</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>, <i>is dashing, almost impudent, beautiful.
She wears mourning too, but with great elegance. She shows
contempt for the timid half-frightened manner of the
wretched</i> BOY (14 <i>years old, and also dressed in black</i>);
on the other hand, she displays a lively tenderness for her
<i>little sister</i>, <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE CHILD</span> <i>(about four), who is dressed in
white, with a black silk sash at the waist</i>.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (22) <i>tall, severe in his attitude of contempt for</i>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>, <i>supercilious and indifferent to the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MOTHER</span>.
<i>He looks as if he had come on the stage against his will</i>.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">DOOR-KEEPER</span> (<i>cap in hand</i>). Excuse me, sir....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>rudely</i>). Eh? What is it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">DOOR-KEEPER</span> (<i>timidly</i>). These people are asking for you,
sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>furious</i>). I am rehearsing, and you know
perfectly well no one's allowed to come in during
rehearsals! (<i>Turning to the Characters</i>): Who are you,
please? What do you want?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>coming forward a little, followed by the others
who seem embarrassed</i>). As a matter of fact ... we have come
here in search of an author....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>half angry, half amazed</i>). An author? What
author?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Any author, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But there's no author here. We are not
rehearsing a new piece.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>vivaciously</i>). So much the better, so
much the better! We can be your new piece.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">AN ACTOR</span> (<i>coming forward from the others</i>). Oh, do you hear
that?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>to Step-Daughter</i>). Yes, but if the author
isn't here ... (<i>To Manager</i>) ... unless you would be
willing....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You are trying to be funny.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, for Heaven's sake, what are you saying? We
bring you a drama, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. We may be your fortune.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Will you oblige me by going away? We haven't
time to waste with mad people.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>mellifluously</i>). Oh sir, you know well that
life is full of infinite absurdities, which, strangely
enough, do not even need to appear plausible, since they are
true.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What the devil is he talking about?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I say that to reverse the ordinary process may
well be considered a madness: that is, to create credible
situations, in order that they may appear true. But permit
me to observe that if this be madness, it is the sole
<i>raison d'être</i> of your profession, gentlemen. (<i>The actors
look hurt and perplexed</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>getting up and looking at him</i>). So our
profession seems to you one worthy of madmen then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Well, to make seem true that which isn't true
... without any need ... for a joke as it were.... Isn't
that your mission, gentlemen: to give life to fantastic
characters on the stage?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>interpreting the rising anger of the
Company</i>). But I would beg you to believe, my dear sir, that
the profession of the comedian is a noble one. If today, as
things go, the playwrights give us stupid comedies to play
and puppets to represent instead of men, remember we are
proud to have given life to immortal works here on these
very boards! (<i>The actors, satisfied, applaud their
Manager</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>interrupting furiously</i>). Exactly, perfectly,
to living beings more alive than those who breathe and wear
clothes: beings less real perhaps, but truer! I agree with
you entirely. (<i>The actors look at one another in
amazement</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But what do you mean? Before, you said....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, excuse me, I meant it for you, sir, who were
crying out that you had no time to lose with madmen, while
no one better than yourself knows that nature uses the
instrument of human fantasy in order to pursue her high
creative purpose.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Very well,—but where does all this take us?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Nowhere! It is merely to show you that one is
born to life in many forms, in many shapes, as tree, or as
stone, as water, as butterfly, or as woman. So one may also
be born a character in a play.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>with feigned comic dismay</i>). So you and these
other friends of yours have been born characters?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Exactly, and alive as you see! (<i>Manager and
actors burst out laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>hurt</i>). I am sorry you laugh, because we carry
in us a drama, as you can guess from this woman here veiled
in black.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>losing patience at last and almost
indignant</i>). Oh, chuck it! Get away please! Clear out of
here! (<i>to Property Man</i>). For Heaven's sake, turn them out!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>resisting</i>). No, no, look here, we....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>roaring</i>). We come here to work, you know.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">LEADING ACTOR</span>. One cannot let oneself be made such a fool
of.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>determined, coming forward</i>). I marvel at your
incredulity, gentlemen. Are you not accustomed to see the
characters created by an author spring to life in yourselves
and face each other? Just because there is no "book"
(<i>pointing to the Prompter's box</i>) which contains us, you
refuse to believe....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>advances towards Manager, smiling and
coquettish</i>). Believe me, we are really six most interesting
characters, sir; side-tracked however.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, that is the word! (<i>To Manager all at
once</i>): In the sense, that is, that the author who created
us alive no longer wished, or was no longer able, materially
to put us into a work of art. And this was a real crime,
sir; because he who has had the luck to be born a character
can laugh even at death. He cannot die. The man, the writer,
the instrument of the creation will die, but his creation
does not die. And to live for ever, it does not need to have
extraordinary gifts or to be able to work wonders. Who was
Sancho Panza? Who was Don Abbondio? Yet they live eternally
because—live germs as they were—they had the fortune to
find a fecundating matrix, a fantasy which could raise and
nourish them: make them live for ever!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. That is quite all right. But what do you want
here, all of you?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. We want to live.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>ironically</i>). For Eternity?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, sir, only for a moment ... in you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">AN ACTOR</span>. Just listen to him!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">LEADING LADY</span>. They want to live, in us...!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span> (<i>pointing to the Step-Daughter</i>). I've no
objection, as far as that one is concerned!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Look here! look here! The comedy has to be made.
(<i>To the Manager</i>): But if you and your actors are willing,
we can soon concert it among ourselves.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>annoyed</i>). But what do you want to concert? We
don't go in for concerts here. Here we play dramas and
comedies!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Exactly! That is just why we have come to you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. And where is the "book"?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. It is in us! (<i>The actors laugh</i>). The drama is
in us, and we are the drama. We are impatient to play it.
Our inner passion drives us on to this.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>disdainful, alluring, treacherous, full
of impudence</i>). My passion, sir! Ah, if you only knew! My
passion for him! (<i>Points to the Father and makes a pretence
of embracing him. Then she breaks out into a loud laugh</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>angrily</i>). Behave yourself! And please don't
laugh in that fashion.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. With your permission, gentlemen, I, who
am a two months' orphan, will show you how I can dance and
sing.</p>
<p>(<i>Sings and then dances</i>). Prenez garde a Tchou-Thin-Tchou.</p>
<p style="margin-left: 33%;">
Les chinois sont un peuple malin,<br/>
De Shangaî à Pekin,<br/>
Ils ont mis des écriteux partout:<br/>
Prenez garde à Tchou-Thin-Tchou.<br/>
</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">ACTORS</span> and <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">ACTRESSES</span>. Bravo! Well done! Tip-top!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Silence! This isn't a café concert, you know!
(<i>Turning to the Father in consternation</i>): Is she mad?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Mad? No, she's worse than mad.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>to Manager</i>). Worse? Worse? Listen!
Stage this drama for us at once! Then you will see that at a
certain moment I ... when this little darling here ...
(<i>Takes the Child by the hand and leads her to the
Manager</i>): Isn't she a dear? (<i>Takes her up and kisses
her</i>). Darling! Darling! (<i>Puts her down again and adds
feelingly</i>): Well, when God suddenly takes this dear little
child away from that poor mother there; and this imbecile
here (<i>seizing hold of the Boy roughly and pushing him
forward</i>) does the stupidest things, like the fool he is,
you will see me run away. Yes, gentleman, I shall be off.
But the moment hasn't arrived yet. After what has taken
place between him and me (<i>indicates the Father with a
horrible wink</i>), I can't remain any longer in this society,
to have to witness the anguish of this mother here for that
fool.... (<i>indicates the Son</i>). Look at him! Look at him!
See how indifferent, how frigid he is, because he is the
legitimate son. He despises me, despises him (<i>pointing to
the Boy</i>), despises this baby here; because ... we are
bastards (<i>goes to the Mother and embraces her</i>). And he
doesn't want to recognize her as his mother—she who is the
common mother of us all. He looks down upon her as if she
were only the mother of us three bastards. Wretch! (<i>She
says all this very rapidly, excitedly. At the word
"bastards" she raises her voice, and almost spits out the
final "Wretch!"</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>to the Manager, in anguish</i>). In the name of
these two little children, I beg you.... (<i>She grows faint
and is about to fall</i>). Oh God!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>coming forward to support her as do some of the
actors</i>). Quick a chair, a chair for this poor widow!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE ACTORS</span>. Is it true? Has she really fainted?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Quick, a chair! Here!</p>
<p>(<i>One of the actors brings a chair, the others proffer
assistance. The Mother tries to prevent the Father from
lifting the veil which covers her face</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Look at her! Look at her!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. No, no; stop it please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>raising her veil</i>). Let them see you!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>rising and covering her face with her hands, in
desperation</i>). I beg you, sir, to prevent this man from
carrying out his plan which is loathsome to me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>dumbfounded</i>). I don't understand at all. What
is the situation? Is this lady your wife? (<i>to the Father</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, gentlemen: my wife!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But how can she be a widow if you are alive?
(<i>The actors find relief for their astonishment in a loud
laugh</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Don't laugh! Don't laugh like that, for Heaven's
sake. Her drama lies just here in this: she has had a lover,
a man who ought to be here.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>with a cry</i>). No! No!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Fortunately for her, he is dead. Two
months ago as I said. We are in mourning, as you see.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. He isn't here you see, not because he is dead.
He isn't here—look at her a moment and you will
understand—because her drama isn't a drama of the love of
two men for whom she was incapable of feeling anything
except possibly a little gratitude—gratitude not for me but
for the other. She isn't a woman, she is a mother, and her
drama—powerful sir, I assure you—lies, as a matter of
fact, all in these four children she has had by two men.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. I had them? Have you got the courage to say that
I wanted them? (<i>To the company</i>). It was his doing. It was
he who gave me that other man, who forced me to go away with
him.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It isn't true.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>startled</i>). Not true, isn't it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No, it isn't true, it just isn't true.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. And what can you know about it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It isn't true. Don't believe it. (<i>To
Manager</i>). Do you know why she says so? For that fellow
there (<i>indicates the Son</i>). She tortures herself, destroys
herself on account of the neglect of that son there; and she
wants him to believe that if she abandoned him when he was
only two years old, it was because he (<i>indicates the
Father</i>) made her do so.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>vigorously</i>). He forced me to it, and I call
God to witness it (<i>to the Manager</i>). Ask him (<i>indicates
husband</i>) if it isn't true. Let him speak. You (<i>to
daughter</i>) are not in a position to know anything about it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. I know you lived in peace and happiness
with my father while he lived. Can you deny it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. No, I don't deny it....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. He was always full of affection and
kindness for you (<i>to the Boy, angrily</i>). It's true, isn't
it? Tell them! Why don't you speak, you little fool?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Leave the poor boy alone. Why do you want to
make me appear ungrateful, daughter? I don't want to offend
your father. I have answered him that I didn't abandon my
house and my son through any fault of mine, nor from any
wilful passion.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. It is true. It was my doing.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span> (<i>to the Company</i>). What a spectacle!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> We are the audience this time.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. For once, in a way.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>beginning to get really interested</i>). Let's
hear them out. Listen!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Oh yes, you're going to hear a fine bit now. He
will talk to you of the Demon of Experiment.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. You are a cynical imbecile. I've told you so
already a hundred times (<i>to the Manager</i>). He tries to make
fun of me on account of this expression which I have found
to excuse myself with.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>with disgust</i>). Yes, phrases! phrases!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Phrases! Isn't everyone consoled when faced with
a trouble or fact he doesn't understand, by a word, some
simple word, which tells us nothing and yet calms us?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Even in the case of remorse. In fact,
especially then.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Remorse? No, that isn't true. I've done more
than use words to quieten the remorse in me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Yes, there was a bit of money too. Yes,
yes, a bit of money. There were the hundred lire he was
about to offer me in payment, gentlemen.... (<i>sensation of
horror among the actors</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>to the Step-Daughter</i>). This is vile.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Vile? There they were in a pale blue
envelope on a little mahogany table in the back of Madame
Pace's shop. You know Madame Pace—one of those ladies who
attract poor girls of good family into their ateliers, under
the pretext of their selling <i>robes et manteaux</i>.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. And he thinks he has bought the right to tyrannise
over us all with those hundred lire he was going to pay; but
which, fortunately—note this, gentlemen—he had no chance
of paying.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It was a near thing, though, you know!
(<i>laughs ironically</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>protesting</i>.) Shame, my daughter, shame!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Shame indeed! This is my revenge! I am
dying to live that scene.... The room ... I see it.... Here
is the window with the mantles exposed, there the divan, the
looking-glass, a screen, there in front of the window the
little mahogany table with the blue envelope containing one
hundred lire. I see it. I see it. I could take hold of
it.... But you, gentlemen, you ought to turn your backs now:
I am almost nude, you know. But I don't blush: I leave that
to him (<i>indicating Father</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I don't understand this at all.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Naturally enough. I would ask you, sir, to
exercise your authority a little here, and let me speak
before you believe all she is trying to blame me with. Let
me explain.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Ah yes, explain it in your own way.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But don't you see that the whole trouble lies
here. In words, words. Each one of us has within him a whole
world of things, each man of us his own special world. And
how can we ever come to an understanding if I put in the
words I utter the sense and value of things as I see them;
while you who listen to me must inevitably translate them
according to the conception of things each one of you has
within himself. We think we understand each other, but we
never really do! Look here! This woman (<i>indicating the
Mother</i>) takes all my pity for her as a specially ferocious
form of cruelty.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. But you drove me away.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Do you hear her? I drove her away! She believes
I really sent her away.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. You know how to talk, and I don't; but, believe
me sir, (<i>to Manager</i>) after he had married me ... who knows
why? ... I was a poor insignificant woman....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But, good Heavens! it was just for your humility
that I married you. I loved this simplicity in you (<i>He
stops when he sees she makes signs to contradict him, opens
his arms wide in sign of desperation, seeing how hopeless it
is to make himself understood</i>). You see she denies it. Her
mental deafness, believe me, is phenomenal, the limit
(<i>touches his forehead</i>): deaf, deaf, mentally deaf! She has
plenty of feeling. Oh yes, a good heart for the children;
but the brain—deaf, to the point of desperation—!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Yes, but ask him how his intelligence has
helped us.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. If we could see all the evil that may spring
from good, what should we do? (<i>At this point the Leading
Lady who is biting her lips with rage at seeing the Leading
Man flirting with the Step-Daughter, comes forward and says
to the Manager</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. Excuse me, but are we going to rehearse today?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MANAGER</span>. Of course, of course; but let's hear them out.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. This is something quite new.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">L'INGÉNUE</span>. Most interesting!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. Yes, for the people who like that kind of
thing (<i>casts a glance at Leading Man</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Father</i>.) You must please explain yourself
quite clearly (<i>sits down</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Very well then: listen! I had in my service a
poor man, a clerk, a secretary of mine, full of devotion,
who became friends with her (<i>indicating the Mother</i>). They
understood one another, were kindred souls in fact, without,
however, the least suspicion of any evil existing. They were
incapable even of thinking of it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. So he thought of it—for them!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. That's not true. I meant to do good to them—and
to myself, I confess, at the same time. Things had come to
the point that I could not say a word to either of them
without their making a mute appeal, one to the other, with
their eyes. I could see them silently asking each other how
I was to be kept in countenance, how I was to be kept quiet.
And this, believe me, was just about enough of itself to
keep me in a constant rage, to exasperate me beyond measure.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. And why didn't you send him away then—this
secretary of yours?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Precisely what I did, sir. And then I had to
watch this poor woman drifting forlornly about the house
like an animal without a master, like an animal one has
taken in out of pity.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Ah yes...!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>suddenly turning to the Mother</i>). It's true
about the son anyway, isn't it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. He took my son away from me first of all.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But not from cruelty. I did it so that he should
grow up healthy and strong by living in the country.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>pointing to him ironically</i>). As one can
see.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>quickly</i>). Is it my fault if he has grown up
like this? I sent him to a wet nurse in the country, a
peasant, as <i>she</i> did not seem to me strong enough, though
she is of humble origin. That was, anyway, the reason I
married her. Unpleasant all this maybe, but how can it be
helped? My mistake possibly, but there we are! All my life I
have had these confounded aspirations towards a certain
moral sanity. (<i>At this point the Step-Daughter bursts out
into a noisy laugh</i>). Oh, stop, it! Stop it! I can't stand
it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, please stop it, for Heaven's sake.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. But imagine moral sanity from him, if you
please—the client of certain ateliers like that of Madame
Pace!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Fool! That is the proof that I am a man! This
seeming contradiction, gentlemen, is the strongest proof
that I stand here a live man before you. Why, it is just for
this very incongruity in my nature that I have had to suffer
what I have. I could not live by the side of that woman
(<i>indicating the Mother</i>) any longer; but not so much for
the boredom she inspired me with as for the pity I felt for
her.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. And so he turned me out—.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. —well provided for! Yes, I sent her to that
man, gentlemen ... to let her go free of me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE MOTHER</span>. And to free himself.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, I admit it. It was also a liberation for
me. But great evil has come of it. I meant well when I did
it; and I did it more for her sake than mine. I swear it
(<i>crosses his arms on his chest; then turns suddenly to the
Mother</i>). Did I ever lose sight of you until that other man
carried you off to another town, like the angry fool he was?
And on account of my pure interest in you ... my pure
interest, I repeat, that had no base motive in it ... I
watched with the tenderest concern the new family that grew
up around her. She can bear witness to this (<i>points to the
Step-Daughter</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Oh yes, that's true enough. When I was a
kiddie, so so high, you know, with plaits over my shoulders
and knickers longer than my skirts, I used to see him
waiting outside the school for me to come out. He came to
see how I was growing up.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. This is infamous, shameful!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No, why?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Infamous! infamous! (<i>Then excitedly to Manager
explaining</i>). After she (<i>indicating Mother</i>) went away, my
house seemed suddenly empty. She was my incubus, but she
filled my house. I was like a dazed fly alone in the empty
rooms. This boy here (<i>indicating the Son</i>) was educated
away from home, and when he came back, he seemed to me to be
no more mine. With no mother to stand between him and me, he
grew up entirely for himself, on his own, apart, with no tie
of intellect or affection binding him to me. And
then—strange but true—I was driven, by curiosity at first
and then by some tender sentiment, towards her family, which
had come into being through my will. The thought of her
began gradually to fill up the emptiness I felt all around
me. I wanted to know if she were happy in living out the
simple daily duties of life. I wanted to think of her as
fortunate and happy because far away from the complicated
torments of my spirit. And so, to have proof of this, I used
to watch that child coming out of school.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Yes, yes. True. He used to follow me in
the street and smiled at me, waved his hand, like this. I
would look at him with interest, wondering who he might be.
I told my mother, who guessed at once (<i>the Mother agrees
with a nod</i>). Then she didn't want to send me to school for
some days; and when I finally went back, there he was
again—looking so ridiculous—with a paper parcel in his
hands. He came close to me, caressed me, and drew out a fine
straw hat from the parcel, with a bouquet of flowers—all
for me!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. A bit discursive this, you know!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>contemptuously</i>). Literature! Literature!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Literature indeed! This is life, this is
passion!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It may be, but it won't act.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I agree. This is only the part leading up. I
don't suggest this should be staged. She (<i>pointing to the
Step-Daughter</i>), as you see, is no longer the flapper with
plaits down her back—.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. —and the knickers showing below the
skirt!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. The drama is coming now, sir; something new,
complex, most interesting.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. As soon as my father died....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. —there was absolute misery for them. They came
back here, unknown to me. Through her stupidity (<i>pointing
to the Mother</i>)! It is true she can barely write her own
name; but she could anyhow have got her daughter to write to
me that they were in need....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. And how was I to divine all this sentiment in
him?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. That is exactly your mistake, never to have
guessed any of my sentiments.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. After so many years apart, and all that had
happened....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Was it my fault if that fellow carried you away?
It happened quite suddenly; for after he had obtained some
job or other, I could find no trace of them; and so, not
unnaturally, my interest in them dwindled. But the drama
culminated unforeseen and violent on their return, when I
was impelled by my miserable flesh that still lives.... Ah!
what misery, what wretchedness is that of the man who is
alone and disdains debasing <i>liaisons</i>! Not old enough to do
without women, and not young enough to go and look for one
without shame. Misery? It's worse than misery; it's a
horror; for no woman can any longer give him love; and when
a man feels this ... One ought to do without, you say? Yes,
yes, I know. Each of us when he appears before his fellows
is clothed in a certain dignity. But every man knows what
unconfessable things pass within the secrecy of his own
heart. One gives way to the temptation, only to rise from it
again, afterwards, with a great eagerness to reestablish
one's dignity, as if it were a tomb-stone to place on the
grave of one's shame, and a monument to hide and sign the
memory of our weaknesses. Everybody's in the same case. Some
folks haven't the courage to say certain things, that's all!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. All appear to have the courage to do them
though.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, but in secret. Therefore, you want more
courage to say these things. Let a man but speak these
things out, and folks at once label him a cynic. But it
isn't true. He is like all the others, better indeed,
because he isn't afraid to reveal with the light of the
intelligence the red shame of human bestiality on which most
men close their eyes so as not to see it.</p>
<p>Woman—for example, look at her case! She turns tantalizing
inviting glances on you. You seize her. No sooner does she
feel herself in your grasp than she closes her eyes. It is
the sign of her mission, the sign by which she says to man:
"Blind yourself, for I am blind."</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Sometimes she can close them no more:
when she no longer feels the need of hiding her shame to
herself, but dry-eyed and dispassionately, sees only that of
the man who has blinded himself without love. Oh, all these
intellectual complications make me sick, disgust me—all
this philosophy that uncovers the beast in man, and then
seeks to save him, excuse him ... I can't stand it, sir.
When a man seeks to "simplify" life bestially, throwing
aside every relic of humanity, every chaste aspiration,
every pure feeling, all sense of ideality, duty, modesty,
shame ... then nothing is more revolting and nauseous than a
certain kind of remorse—crocodiles' tears, that's what it
is.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Let's come to the point. This is only
discussion.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Very good, sir! But a fact is like a sack which
won't stand up when it is empty. In order that it may stand
up, one has to put into it the reason and sentiment which
have caused it to exist. I couldn't possibly know that after
the death of that man, they had decided to return here, that
they were in misery, and that she (<i>pointing to the Mother</i>)
had gone to work as a modiste, and at a shop of the type of
that of Madame Pace.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. A real high-class modiste, you must know,
gentlemen. In appearance, she works for the leaders of the
best society; but she arranges matters so that these elegant
ladies serve her purpose ... without prejudice to other
ladies who are ... well ... only so so.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. You will believe me, gentlemen, that it never
entered my mind that the old hag offered me work because she
had her eye on my daughter.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Poor mamma! Do you know, sir, what that
woman did when I brought her back the work my mother had
finished? She would point out to me that I had torn one of
my frocks, and she would give it back to my mother to mend.
It was I who paid for it, always I; while this poor creature
here believed she was sacrificing herself for me and these
two children here, sitting up at night sewing Madame Pace's
robes.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. And one day you met there....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Him, him. Yes sir, an old client. There's
a scene for you to play! Superb!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. She, the Mother arrived just then....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>treacherously</i>). Almost in time!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>crying out</i>). No, in time! in time! Fortunately
I recognized her ... in time. And I took them back home with
me to my house. You can imagine now her position and mine:
she, as you see her; and I who cannot look her in the face.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Absurd! How can I possibly be
expected—after that—to be a modest young miss, a fit
person to go with his confounded aspirations for "a solid
moral sanity"?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. For the drama lies all in this—in the
conscience that I have, that each one of us has. We believe
this conscience to be a single thing, but it is many-sided.
There is one for this person, and another for that. Diverse
consciences. So we have this illusion of being one person
for all, of having a personality that is unique in all our
acts. But it isn't true. We perceive this when, tragically
perhaps, in something we do, we are as it were, suspended,
caught up in the air on a kind of hook. Then we perceive
that all of us was not in that act, and that it would be an
atrocious injustice to judge us by that action alone, as if
all our existence were summed up in that one deed. Now do
you understand the perfidy of this girl? She surprised me in
a place, where she ought not to have known me, just as I
could not exist for her; and she now seeks to attach to me a
reality such as I could never suppose I should have to
assume for her in a shameful and fleeting moment of my life.
I feel this above all else. And the drama, you will see,
acquires a tremendous value from this point. Then there is
the position of the others ... his.... (<i>indicating the
Son</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>shrugging his shoulders scornfully</i>). Leave me
alone! I don't come into this.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. What? You don't come into this?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. I've got nothing to do with it, and don't want to
have; because you know well enough I wasn't made to be mixed
up in all this with the rest of you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. We are only vulgar folk! He is the fine
gentleman. You may have noticed, Mr. Manager, that I fix him
now and again with a look of scorn while he lowers his
eyes—for he knows the evil he has done me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>scarcely looking at her</i>). I?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. You! you! I owe my life on the streets to
you. Did you or did you not deny us, with your behaviour, I
won't say the intimacy of home, but even that mere
hospitality which makes guests feel at their ease? We were
intruders who had come to disturb the kingdom of your
legitimacy. I should like to have you witness, Mr. Manager,
certain scenes between him and me. He says I have tyrannized
over everyone. But it was just his behaviour which made me
insist on the reason for which I had come into the
house,—this reason he calls "vile"—into his house, with my
mother who is his mother too. And I came as mistress of the
house.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. It's easy for them to put me always in the wrong.
But imagine, gentlemen, the position of a son, whose fate it
is to see arrive one day at his home a young woman of
impudent bearing, a young woman who inquires for his&gt;
father, with whom who knows what business she has. This
young man has then to witness her return bolder than ever,
accompanied by that child there. He is obliged to watch her
treat his father in an equivocal and confidential manner.
She asks money of him in a way that lets one suppose he must
give it her, <i>must</i>, do you understand, because he has every
obligation to do so.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But I have, as a matter of fact, this
obligation. I owe it to your mother.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. How should I know? When had I ever seen or heard of
her? One day there arrive with her (<i>indicating
Step-Daughter</i>) that lad and this baby here. I am told:
"This is <i>your</i> mother too, you know." I divine from her
manner (<i>indicating Step-Daughter again</i>) why it is they
have come home. I had rather not say what I feel and think
about it. I shouldn't even care to confess to myself. No
action can therefore be hoped for from me in this affair.
Believe me, Mr. Manager, I am an "unrealized" character,
dramatically speaking; and I find myself not at all at ease
in their company. Leave me out of it, I beg you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. What? It is just because you are so that....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. How do you know what I am like? When did you ever
bother your head about me?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I admit it. I admit it. But isn't that a
situation in itself? This aloofness of yours which is so
cruel to me and to your mother, who returns home and sees
you almost for the first time grown up, who doesn't
recognize you but knows you are her son.... (<i>pointing out
the Mother to the Manager</i>). See, she's crying!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>angrily, stamping her foot</i>). Like a
fool!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>indicating Step-Daughter</i>). She can't stand him
you know. (<i>Then referring again to the Son</i>): He says he
doesn't come into the affair, whereas he is really the hinge
of the whole action. Look at that lad who is always clinging
to his mother, frightened and humiliated. It is on account
of this fellow here. Possibly his situation is the most
painful of all. He feels himself a stranger more than the
others. The poor little chap feels mortified, humiliated at
being brought into a home out of charity as it were. (<i>In
confidence</i>)—: He is the image of his father. Hardly talks
at all. Humble and quiet.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Oh, we'll cut him out. You've no notion what a
nuisance boys are on the stage....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. He disappears soon, you know. And the baby too.
She is the first to vanish from the scene. The drama
consists finally in this: when that mother re-enters my
house, her family born outside of it, and shall we say
superimposed on the original, ends with the death of the
little girl, the tragedy of the boy and the flight of the
elder daughter. It cannot go on, because it is foreign to
its surroundings. So after much torment, we three remain: I,
the mother, that son. Then, owing to the disappearance of
that extraneous family, we too find ourselves strange to one
another. We find we are living in an atmosphere of mortal
desolation which is the revenge, as he (<i>indicating Son</i>)
scornfully said of the Demon of Experiment, that
unfortunately hides in me. Thus, sir, you see when faith is
lacking, it becomes impossible to create certain states of
happiness, for we lack the necessary humility.
Vaingloriously, we try to substitute ourselves for this
faith, creating thus for the rest of the world a reality
which we believe after their fashion, while, actually, it
doesn't exist. For each one of us has his own reality to be
respected before God, even when it is harmful to one's very
self.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. There is something in what you say. I assure
you all this interests me very much. I begin to think
there's the stuff for a drama in all this, and not a bad
drama either.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>coming forward</i>). When you've got a
character like me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>shutting her up, all excited to learn the
decision of the Manager</i>). You be quiet!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>reflecting, heedless of interruption</i>). It's
new ... hem ... yes....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Absolutely new!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You've got a nerve though, I must say, to come
here and fling it at me like this....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. You will understand, sir, born as we are for the
stage....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Are you amateur actors then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No. I say born for the stage, because....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Oh, nonsense. You're an old hand, you know.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No sir, no. We act that rôle for which we have
been cast, that rôle which we are given in life. And in my
own case, passion itself, as usually happens, becomes a
trifle theatrical when it is exalted.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well, well, that will do. But you see, without
an author ... I could give you the address of an author if
you like....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, no. Look here! You must be the author.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I? What are you talking about?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, you, you! Why not?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Because I have never been an author: that's
why.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Then why not turn author now? Everybody does it.
You don't want any special qualities. Your task is made much
easier by the fact that we are all here alive before you....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It won't do.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. What? When you see us live our drama....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, that's all right. But you want someone to
write it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, no. Someone to take it down, possibly, while
we play it, scene by scene! It will be enough to sketch it
out at first, and then try it over.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well ... I am almost tempted. It's a bit of an
idea. One might have a shot at it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Of course. You'll see what scenes will come out
of it. I can give you one, at once....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. By Jove, it tempts me. I'd like to have a go at
it. Let's try it out. Come with me to my office (<i>turning to
the Actors</i>). You are at liberty for a bit, but don't stop
out of the theatre for long. In a quarter of an hour, twenty
minutes, all back here again! (<i>To the Father</i>): We'll see
what can be done. Who knows if we don't get something really
extraordinary out of it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. There's no doubt about it. They (<i>indicating the
Characters</i>) had better come with us too, hadn't they?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, yes. Come on! come on! (<i>Moves away and
then turning to the actors</i>): Be punctual, please! (<i>Manager
and the Six Characters cross the stage and go off. The other
actors remain, looking at one another in astonishment</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Is he serious? What the devil does he want to
do?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. This is rank madness.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THIRD ACTOR</span>. Does he expect to knock up a drama in five
minutes?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. Like the improvisers!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">LEADING LADY</span>. If he thinks I'm going to take part in a joke
like this....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. I'm out of it anyway.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">FOURTH ACTOR</span>. I should like to know who they are (<i>alludes
to Characters</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THIRD ACTOR</span>. What do you suppose? Madmen or rascals!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. And he takes them seriously!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">L'INGÉNUE</span>. Vanity! He fancies himself as an author now.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. It's absolutely unheard of. If the stage has
come to this ... well I'm....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">FIFTH ACTOR</span>. It's rather a joke.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THIRD ACTOR</span>. Well, we'll see what's going to happen next.</p>
<p>(<i>Thus talking, the actors leave the stage; some going out
by the little door at the back; others retiring to their
dressing-rooms.</i></p>
<p><i>The curtain remains up.</i></p>
<p><i>The action of the play is suspended for twenty minutes</i>).</p>
</blockquote>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h4>ACT II.</h4>
<blockquote>
<p><i>The stage call-bells ring to warn the company that the play
is about to begin again.</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> <i>comes out of the Manager's office along
with</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE CHILD</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE BOY</span>. <i>As she comes out of the
office, she cries</i>:—</p>
<p>Nonsense! nonsense! Do it yourselves! I'm not going to mix
myself up in this mess. (<i>Turning to the Child and coming
quickly with her on to the stage</i>): Come on, Rosetta, let's
run!</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE BOY</span> <i>follows them slowly, remaining a little behind and
seeming perplexed</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. (<i>Stops, bends over the Child and takes
the latter's face between her hands</i>). My little darling!
You're frightened, aren't you? You don't know where we are,
do you? (<i>Pretending to reply to a question of the Child</i>):
What is the stage? It's a place, baby, you know, where
people play at being serious, a place where they act
comedies. We've got to act a comedy now, dead serious, you
know; and you're in it also, little one. (<i>Embraces her,
pressing the little head to her breast, and rocking the
child for a moment</i>). Oh darling, darling, what a horrid
comedy you've got to play! What a wretched part they've
found for you! A garden ... a fountain ... look ... just
suppose, kiddie, it's here. Where, you say? Why, right here
in the middle. It's all pretence you know. That's the
trouble, my pet: it's all make-believe here. It's better to
imagine it though, because if they fix it up for you, it'll
only be painted cardboard, painted cardboard for the
rockery, the water, the plants.... Ah, but I think a baby
like this one would sooner have a make-believe fountain than
a real one, so she could play with it. What a joke it'll be
for the others! But for you, alas! not quite such a joke:
you who are real, baby dear, and really play by a real
fountain this big and green and beautiful, with ever so many
bamboos around it that are reflected in the water, and a
whole lot of little ducks swimming about.... No, Rosetta,
no, your mother doesn't bother about you on account of that
wretch of a son there. I'm in the devil of a temper, and as
for that lad.... (<i>Seizes Boy by the arm to force him to
take one of his hands out of his pockets</i>). What have you
got there? What are you hiding? (<i>Pulls his hand out of his
pocket, looks into it and catches the glint of a revolver</i>).
Ah! where did you get this?</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE BOY</span>, <i>very pale in the face, looks at her, but does not
answer</i>).</p>
<p>Idiot! If I'd been in your place, instead of killing myself,
I'd have shot one of those two, or both of them: father and
son.</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> <i>enters from the office, all excited from his
work</i>. <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> <i>follows him</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Come on, come on dear! Come here for a minute!
We've arranged everything. It's all fixed up.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>also excited</i>). If you please, young lady,
there are one or two points to settle still. Will you come
along?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>following him towards the office</i>).
Ouff! what's the good, if you've arranged everything.</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>, <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MANAGER</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER</span> <i>go back into the
office again (off) for a moment. At the same time,</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>
<i>followed by</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>, <i>comes out</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>looking at the three entering office</i>). Oh this is
fine, fine! And to think I can't even get away!</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> <i>attempts to look at him, but lowers her eyes
immediately when he turns away from her. She then sits
down</i>. <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE BOY</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE CHILD</span> <i>approach her. She casts a
glance again at the Son, and speaks with humble tones,
trying to draw him into conversation</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. And isn't my punishment the worst of all? (<i>Then
seeing from the Sons manner that he will not bother himself
about her</i>). My God! Why are you so cruel? Isn't it enough
for one person to support all this torment? Must you then
insist on others seeing it also?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>half to himself, meaning the Mother to hear,
however</i>). And they want to put it on the stage! If there
was at least a reason for it! He thinks he has got at the
meaning of it all. Just as if each one of us in every
circumstance of life couldn't find his own explanation of
it! (<i>Pauses</i>). He complains he was discovered in a place
where he ought not to have been seen, in a moment of his
life which ought to have remained hidden and kept out of the
reach of that convention which he has to maintain for other
people. And what about my case? Haven't I had to reveal what
no son ought ever to reveal: how father and mother live and
are man and wife for themselves quite apart from that idea
of father and mother which we give them? When this idea is
revealed, our life is then linked at one point only to that
man and that woman; and as such it should shame them,
shouldn't it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> <i>hides her face in her hands. From the
dressing-rooms and the little door at the back of the stage
the actors and</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STAGE MANAGER</span> <i>return, followed by the</i>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>, <i>and the</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span>. <i>At the same moment</i>,
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE MANAGER</span> <i>comes out of his office, accompanied by the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">FATHER</span>
<i>and the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER</span>.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Come on, come on, ladies and gentlemen! Heh!
you there, machinist!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MACHINIST</span>. Yes sir?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Fix up the white parlor with the floral
decorations. Two wings and a drop with a door will do. Hurry
up!</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE MACHINIST</span> <i>runs off at once to prepare the scene, and
arranges it while</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> <i>talks with the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STAGE MANAGER</span>,
<i>the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>, <i>and the</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span> <i>on matters
of detail</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Property Man</i>). Just have a look, and see
if there isn't a sofa or divan in the wardrobe....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. There's the green one.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No no! Green won't do. It was yellow,
ornamented with flowers—very large! and most comfortable!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. There isn't one like that.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It doesn't matter. Use the one we've got.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Doesn't matter? It's most important!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. We're only trying it now. Please don't
interfere. (<i>To Property Man</i>): See if we've got a shop
window—long and narrowish.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. And the little table! The little mahogany
table for the pale blue envelope!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span> (<i>To Manager</i>). There's that little gilt one.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. That'll do fine.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. A mirror.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. And the screen! We must have a screen.
Otherwise how can I manage?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. That's all right, Miss. We've got any amount
of them.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to the Step-Daughter</i>). We want some clothes
pegs too, don't we?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Yes, several, several!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. See how many we've got and bring them all.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. All right!</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE PROPERTY MAN</span> <i>hurries off to obey his orders. While he
is putting the things in their places, the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MANAGER</span> <i>talks
to the</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span> <i>and then with the Characters and the
actors</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Prompter</i>). Take your seat. Look here: this
is the outline of the scenes, act by act (<i>hands him some
sheets of paper</i>). And now I'm going to ask you to do
something out of the ordinary.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span>. Take it down in shorthand?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>pleasantly surprised</i>). Exactly! Can you do
shorthand?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">PROMPTER</span>. Yes, a little.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE MANAGER</span>. Good! (<i>Turning to a stage hand</i>): Go and get some
paper from my office, plenty, as much as you can find.</p>
<p>(<i>The stage hand goes off, and soon returns with a handful
of paper which he gives to the Prompter</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>To Prompter</i>). You follow the scenes as we
play them, and try and get the points down, at any rate the
most important ones. (<i>Then addressing the actors</i>): Clear
the stage, ladies and gentlemen! Come over here (<i>pointing
to the Left</i>) and listen attentively.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. But, excuse me, we....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>guessing her thought</i>). Don't worry! You won't
have to improvise.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. What have we to do then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Nothing. For the moment you just watch and
listen. Everybody will get his part written out afterwards.
At present we're going to try the thing as best we can.
They're going to act now.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>as if fallen from the clouds into the confusion
of the stage</i>). We? What do you mean, if you please, by a
rehearsal?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. A rehearsal for them (<i>points to the actors</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But since we are the characters....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. All right: "characters" then, if you insist on
calling yourselves such. But here, my dear sir, the
characters don't act. Here the actors do the acting. The
characters are there, in the "book" (<i>pointing towards
Prompter's box</i>)—when there is a "book"!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I won't contradict you; but excuse me, the
actors aren't the characters. They want to be, they pretend
to be, don't they? Now if these gentlemen here are fortunate
enough to have us alive before them....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Oh this is grand! You want to come before the
public yourselves then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. As we are....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I can assure you it would be a magnificent
spectacle!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. What's the use of us here anyway then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You're not going to pretend that you can act?
It makes me laugh! (<i>The actors laugh</i>). There, you see,
they are laughing at the notion. But, by the way, I must
cast the parts. That won't be difficult. They cast
themselves. (<i>To the Second Lady Lead</i>): You play the
Mother. (<i>To the Father</i>): We must find her a name.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Amalia, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But that is the real name of your wife. We
don't want to call her by her real name.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Why ever not, if it is her name? Still, perhaps,
if that lady must.... (<i>makes a slight motion of the hand to
indicate the Second Lady Lead</i>). I see this woman here
(<i>means the Mother</i>) as Amalia. But do as you like (<i>gets
more and more confused</i>). I don't know what to say to you.
Already, I begin to hear my own words ring false, as if they
had another sound....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Don't you worry about it. It'll be our job to
find the right tones. And as for her name, if you want her
Amalia, Amalia it shall be; and if you don't like it, we'll
find another! For the moment though, we'll call the
characters in this way: (<i>to Juvenile Lead</i>) You are the
Son; (<i>to the Leading Lady</i>) You naturally are the
Step-Daughter.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>excitedly</i>). What? what? I, that woman
there? (<i>Bursts out laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>angry</i>). What is there to laugh at?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> (<i>indignant</i>). Nobody has ever dared to laugh
at me. I insist on being treated with respect; otherwise I
go away.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No, no, excuse me ... I am not laughing
at you....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Step-Daughter</i>). You ought to feel honoured
to be played by....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> (<i>at once, contemptuously</i>). "That woman
there"....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. But I wasn't speaking of you, you know. I
was speaking of myself—whom I can't see at all in you! That
is all. I don't know ... but ... you ... aren't in the least
like me....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. True. Here's the point. Look here, sir, our
temperaments, our souls....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Temperament, soul, be hanged! Do you suppose
the spirit of the piece is in you? Nothing of the kind!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. What, haven't we our own temperaments, our own
souls?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Not at all. Your soul or whatever you like to
call it takes shape here. The actors give body and form to
it, voice and gesture. And my actors—I may tell you—have
given expression to much more lofty material than this
little drama of yours, which may or may not hold up on the
stage. But if it does, the merit of it, believe me, will be
due to my actors.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I don't dare contradict you, sir; but, believe
me, it is a terrible suffering for us who are as we are,
with these bodies of ours, these features to see....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>cutting him short and out of patience</i>). Good
heavens! The make-up will remedy all that, man, the
make-up....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Maybe. But the voice, the gestures....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Now, look here! On the stage, you as yourself,
cannot exist. The actor here acts you, and that's an end to
it!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I understand. And now I think I see why our
author who conceived us as we are, all alive, didn't want to
put us on the stage after all. I haven't the least desire to
offend your actors. Far from it! But when I think that I am
to be acted by ... I don't know by whom....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span> (<i>on his dignity</i>). By me, if you've no
objection!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>humbly, mellifluously</i>). Honoured, I assure
you, sir. (<i>Bows</i>). Still, I must say that try as this
gentleman may, with all his good will and wonderful art, to
absorb me into himself....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Oh chuck it! "Wonderful art!" Withdraw that,
please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. The performance he will give, even doing his
best with make-up to look like me....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. It will certainly be a rat difficult! (<i>The
actors laugh</i>.)</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>, Exactly! It will be difficult to act me as I
really am. The effect will be rather—apart from the
make-up—according as to how he supposes I am, as he senses
me—if he does sense me—and not as I inside of myself feel
myself to be. It seems to me then that account should be
taken of this by everyone whose duty it may become to
criticize us....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Heavens! The man's starting to think about the
critics now! Let them say what they like. It's up to us to
put on the play if we can (<i>looking around</i>). Come on! come
on! Is the stage set? (<i>To the actors and Characters</i>):
Stand back—stand back! Let me see, and don't let's lose any
more time! (<i>To the Step-Daughter</i>): Is it all right as it
is now?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Well, to tell the truth, I don't
recognize the scene.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. My dear lady, you can't possibly suppose that
we can construct that shop of Madame Pace piece by piece
here? (<i>To the Father</i>): You said a white room with flowered
wall paper, didn't you?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well then. We've got the furniture right more
or less. Bring that little table a bit further forward.
(<i>The stage hands obey the order. To Property Man</i>): You go
and find an envelope, if possible, a pale blue one; and give
it to that gentleman (<i>indicates Father</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. An ordinary envelope?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">MANAGER</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">FATHER</span>. Yes, yes, an ordinary envelope.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">PROPERTY MAN</span>. At once, sir (<i>exit</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Ready, everyone! First scene—the Young Lady.
(<i>The Leading Lady comes forward</i>). No, no, you must wait. I
meant her (<i>indicating the Step-Daughter</i>). You just watch—</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>adding at once</i>). How I shall play it,
how I shall live it!...</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> (<i>offended</i>). I shall live it also, you may be
sure, as soon as I begin!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>with his hands to his head</i>). Ladies and
gentlemen, if you please! No more useless discussions! Scene
I: the young lady with Madame Pace: Oh! (<i>looks around as if
lost</i>). And this Madame Pace, where is she?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. She isn't with us, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Then what the devil's to be done?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But she is alive too.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, but where is she?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. One minute. Let me speak! (<i>turning to the
actresses</i>). If these ladies would be so good as to give me
their hats for a moment....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE ACTRESSES</span> (<i>half surprised, half laughing, in chorus</i>).
What?</p>
<p>Why?</p>
<p>Our hats?</p>
<p>What does he say?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What are you going to do with the ladies' hats?
(<i>The actors laugh</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Oh nothing. I just want to put them on these
pegs for a moment. And one of the ladies will be so kind as
to take off her mantle....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE ACTORS</span>. Oh, what d'you think of that?</p>
<p>Only the mantle?</p>
<p>He must be mad.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">SOME ACTRESSES</span>. But why?</p>
<p>Mantles as well?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. To hang them up here for a moment Please be so
kind, will you?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE ACTRESSES</span> (<i>taking off their hats, one or two also their
cloaks, and going to hang them on the racks</i>). After all,
why not?</p>
<p>There you are!</p>
<p>This is really funny.</p>
<p>We've got to put them on show.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Exactly; just like that, on show.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. May we know why?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I'll tell you. Who knows if, by arranging the
stage for her, she does not come here herself, attracted by
the very articles of her trade? (<i>Inviting the actors to
look towards the exit at back of stage</i>): Look! Look!</p>
<p>(<i>The door at the back of stage opens and</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span>
<i>enters and takes a few steps forward. She is a fat, oldish
woman with puffy oxygenated hair. She is rouged and
powdered, dressed with a comical elegance in black silk.
Round her waist is a long silver chain from which hangs a
pair of scissors. The Step-Daughter runs over to her at once
amid the stupor of the actors</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>turning towards her</i>). There she is!
There she is!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>radiant</i>). It's she! I said so, didn't I? There
she is!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>conquering his surprise, and then becoming
indignant</i>). What sort of a trick is this?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span> (<i>almost at the same time</i>). What's going to
happen next?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. Where does <i>she</i> come from?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">L'INGÉNUE</span>. They've been holding her in reserve, I guess.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. A vulgar trick!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>dominating the protests</i>). Excuse me, all of
you! Why are you so anxious to destroy in the name of a
vulgar, commonplace sense of truth, this reality which comes
to birth attracted and formed by the magic of the stage
itself, which has indeed more right to live here than you,
since it is much truer than you—if you don't mind my saying
so? Which is the actress among you who is to play Madame
Pace? Well, here is Madame Pace herself. And you will allow,
I fancy, that the actress who acts her will be less true
than this woman here, who is herself in person. You see my
daughter recognized her and went over to her at once. Now
you're going to witness the scene!</p>
<p><i>But the scene between the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span>
<i>has already begun despite the protest of the actors and the
reply of</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. <i>It has begun quietly, naturally, in a
manner impossible for the stage. So when the actors, called
to attention by</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>, <i>turn round and see</i> MADAME
PACE, <i>who has placed one hand under the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER'S</span>
<i>chin to raise her head, they observe her at first with
great attention, but hearing her speak in an unintelligible
manner their interest begins to wane.</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well? well?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. What does she say?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. One can't hear a word.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">JUVENILE LEAD</span>. Louder! Louder please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>leaving Madame Pace, who smiles a
Sphinx-like smile, and advancing towards the actors</i>).
Louder? Louder? What are you talking about? These aren't
matters which can be shouted at the top of one's voice. If I
have spoken them out loud, it was to shame him and have my
revenge (<i>indicates Father</i>). But for Madame it's quite a
different matter.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Indeed? indeed? But here, you know, people have
got to make themselves heard, my dear. Even we who are on
the stage can't hear you. What will it be when the public's
in the theatre? And anyway, you can very well speak up now
among yourselves, since we shan't be present to listen to
you as we are now. You've got to pretend to be alone in a
room at the back of a shop where no one can hear you.</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> <i>coquettishly and with a touch of malice
makes a sign of disagreement two or three times with her
finger</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What do you mean by no?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>sotto voce, mysteriously</i>). There's
someone who will hear us if she (<i>indicating Madame Pace</i>)
speaks out loud.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>in consternation</i>). What? Have you got someone
else to spring on us now? (<i>The actors burst out laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, no sir. She is alluding to me. I've got to
be here—there behind that door, in waiting; and Madame Pace
knows it. In fact, if you will allow me, I'll go there at
once, so I can be quite ready. (<i>Moves away</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>stopping him</i>). No! Wait! wait! We must
observe the conventions of the theatre. Before you are
ready....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>interrupting him</i>). No, get on with it
at once! I'm just dying, I tell you, to act this scene. If
he's ready, I'm more than ready.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>shouting</i>). But, my dear young lady, first of
all, we must have the scene between you and this lady ...
(<i>indicates Madame Pace</i>). Do you understand?...</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Good Heavens! She's been telling me what
you know already: that mamma's work is badly done again,
that the material's ruined; and that if I want her to
continue to help us in our misery I must be patient....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span> (<i>coming forward with an air of great
importance</i>). Yes indeed, sir, I no wanta take advantage of
her, I no wanta be hard....</p>
<p>(<i>Note. Madame Face is supposed to talk in a jargon half
Italian, half Spanish</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>alarmed</i>). What? What? She talks like that?
(<i>The actors burst out laughing again</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>also laughing</i>). Yes yes, that's the way
she talks, half English, half Italian! Most comical it is!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span>. Itta seem not verra polite gentlemen laugha
atta me eef I trya best speaka English.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. <i>Diamine</i>! Of course! Of course! Let her talk
like that! Just what we want. Talk just like that, Madam, if
you please! The effect will be certain. Exactly what was
wanted to put a little comic relief into the crudity of the
situation. Of course she talks like that! Magnificent!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Magnificent? Certainly! When certain
suggestions are made to one in language of that kind, the
effect is certain, since it seems almost a joke. One feels
inclined to laugh when one hears her talk about an "old
signore" "who wanta talka nicely with you." Nice old
signore, eh, Madame?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span>. Not so old my dear, not so old! And even if you
no lika him, he won't make any scandal!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>jumping up amid the amazement and consternation
of the actors who had not been noticing her. They move to
restrain her</i>). You old devil! You murderess!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>running over to calm her Mother</i>). Calm
yourself, mother, calm yourself! Please don't....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>going to her also at the same time</i>). Calm
yourself! Don't get excited! Sit down now!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Well then, take that woman away out of my sight!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>to Manager</i>). It is impossible for my
mother to remain here.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>to Manager</i>). They can't be here together. And
for this reason, you see: that woman there was not with us
when we came.... If they are on together, the whole thing is
given away inevitably, as you see.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It doesn't matter. This is only a first rough
sketch—just to get an idea of the various points of the
scene, even confusedly.... (<i>Turning to the Mother and
leading her to her chair</i>): Come along, my dear lady, sit
down now, and let's get on with the scene....</p>
<p>(<i>Meanwhile, the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER</span>, <i>coming forward again,
turns to Madame Pace</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Come on, Madame, come on!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span> (<i>offended</i>). No, no, <i>grazie</i>. I not do
anything witha your mother present.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Nonsense! Introduce this "old signore"
who wants to talk nicely to me (<i>addressing the company
imperiously</i>). We've got to do this scene one way or
another, haven't we? Come on! (<i>to Madame Pace</i>). You can
go!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">MADAME PACE</span>. Ah yes! I go'way! I go'way! Certainly! (<i>Exits
furious</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>to the Father</i>). Now you make your
entry. No, you needn't go over here. Come here. Let's
suppose you've already come in. Like that, yes! I'm here
with bowed head, modest like. Come on! Out with your voice!
Say "Good morning, Miss" in that peculiar tone, that special
tone....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Excuse me, but are you the Manager, or am I?
(<i>To the Father, who looks undecided and perplexed</i>): Get on
with it, man! Go down there to the back of the stage. You
needn't go off. Then come right forward here.</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> <i>does as he is told, looking troubled and
perplexed at first. But as soon as he begins to move, the
reality of the action affects him, and he begins to smile
and to be more natural. The actors watch intently</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>sottovoce, quickly to the Prompter in his
box</i>). Ready! ready? Get ready to write now.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>coming forward and speaking in a different
tone</i>). Good afternoon, Miss!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>head bowed down slightly, with
restrained disgust</i>). Good afternoon!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>looks under her hat which partly covers her
face. Perceiving she is very young, he makes an exclamation,
partly of surprise, partly of fear lest he compromise
himself in a risky adventure</i>) "Ah ... but ... ah ... I say
... this is not the first time that you have come here, is
it?"</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>modestly</i>). No sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. You've been here before, eh? (<i>Then seeing her
nod agreement</i>): More than once? (<i>Waits for her to answer,
looks under her hat, smiles, and then says</i>): Well then,
there's no need to be so shy, is there? May I take off your
hat?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>anticipating him and with veiled
disgust</i>). No sir ... I'll do it myself. (<i>Takes it off
quickly</i>).</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>, <i>who watches the progress of the scene with</i>
<span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> <i>and the other two children who cling to her, is on
thorns; and follows with varying expressions of sorrow,
indignation, anxiety, and horror the words and actions of
the other two. From time to time she hides her face in her
hands and sobs</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Oh, my God, my God!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>playing his part with a touch of gallantry</i>).
Give it to me! I'll put it down (<i>takes hat from her
hands</i>). But a dear little head like yours ought to have a
smarter hat. Come and help me choose one from the stock,
won't you?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">L'INGÉNUE</span> (<i>interrupting</i>). I say ... those are our hats you
know.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>furious</i>). Silence! silence! Don't try and be
funny, if you please.... We're playing the scene now I'd
have you notice. (<i>To the Step-Daughter</i>). Begin again,
please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>continuing</i>). No thank you, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Oh, come now. Don't talk like that. You must
take it. I shall be upset if you don't. There are some
lovely little hats here; and then—Madame will be pleased.
She expects it, anyway, you know.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No, no! I couldn't wear it!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Oh, you're thinking about what they'd say at
home if they saw you come in with a new hat? My dear girl,
there's always a way round these little matters, you know.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>all keyed up</i>). No, it's not that. I
couldn't wear it because I am ... as you see ... you might
have noticed.... (<i>showing her black dress</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. ... in mourning! Of course: I beg your pardon:
I'm frightfully sorry....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>forcing herself to conquer her
indignation and nausea</i>). Stop! Stop! It's I who must thank
you. There's no need for you to feel mortified or specially
sorry. Don't think any more of what I've said. (<i>Tries to
smile</i>). I must forget that I am dressed so....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>interrupting and turning to the Prompter</i>).
Stop a minute! Stop! Don't write that down. Cut out that
last bit. (<i>Then to the Father and Step-Daughter</i>). Fine!
it's going fine! (<i>To the Father only</i>). And now you can go
on as we arranged. (<i>To the actors</i>). Pretty good that
scene, where he offers her the hat, eh?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. The best's coming now. Why can't we go
on?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Have a little patience! (<i>To the actors</i>): Of
course, it must be treated rather lightly.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Still, with a bit of go in it!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. Of course! It's easy enough! (<i>To Leading
Man</i>): Shall you and I try it now?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Why, yes! I'll prepare my entrance. (<i>Exit in
order to make his entrance</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Leading Lady</i>). See here! The scene between
you and Madame Pace is finished. I'll have it written out
properly after. You remain here ... oh, where are you going?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. One minute. I want to put my hat on again
(<i>goes over to hat-rack and puts her hat on her head</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Good! You stay here with your head bowed down a
bit.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. But she isn't dressed in black.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. But I shall be, and much more effectively than
you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Step-Daughter</i>). Be quiet please, and
watch! You'll be able to learn something. (<i>Clapping his
hands</i>) Come on! come on! Entrance, please!</p>
<p>(<i>The door at rear of stage opens, and the Leading Man
enters with the lively manner of an old gallant. The
rendering of the scene by the actors from the very first
words is seen to be quite a different thing, though it has
not in any way the air of a parody. Naturally, the
Step-Daughter and the Father, not being able to recognize
themselves in the Leading Lady and the Leading Man, who
deliver their words in different tones and with a different
psychology, express, sometimes with smiles, sometimes with
gestures, the impression they receive</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Good afternoon, Miss....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>at once unable to contain himself</i>). No! no!</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> <i>noticing the way the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>
<i>enters, bursts out laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>furious</i>). Silence! And you please just stop
that laughing. If we go on like this, we shall never finish.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Forgive me, sir, but it's natural enough.
This lady (<i>indicating Leading Lady</i>) stands there still;
but if she is supposed to be me, I can assure you that if I
heard anyone say "Good afternoon" in that manner and in that
tone, I should burst out laughing as I did.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, yes, the manner, the tone....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Nonsense! Rubbish! Stand aside and let me see
the action.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. If I've got to represent an old fellow who's
coming into a house of an equivocal character....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Don't listen to them, for Heaven's sake! Do it
again! It goes fine. (<i>Waiting for the actors to begin
again</i>): Well?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Good afternoon, Miss.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. Good afternoon.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span> (<i>imitating the gesture of the Father when he
looked under the hat, and then expressing quite clearly
first satisfaction and then fear</i>). Ah, but ... I say ...
this is not the first time that you have come here, is it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Good, but not quite so heavily. Like this
(<i>acts himself</i>): "This isn't the first time that you have
come here".... (<i>To Leading Lady</i>) And you say: "No, sir."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. No, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. You've been here before, more than once.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. No, no, stop! Let her nod "yes" first.</p>
<p>"You've been here before, eh?" (<i>The Leading Lady lifts up
her head slightly and closes her eyes as though in disgust.
Then she inclines her head twice</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>unable to contain herself</i>). Oh my God!
(<i>Puts a hand to her mouth to prevent herself from
laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>turning round</i>). What's the matter?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Nothing, nothing!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to Leading Man</i>). Go on!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. You've been here before, eh? Well then, there's
no need to be so shy, is there? May I take off your hat?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">(THE LEADING MAN</span> <i>says this last speech in such a tone and
with such gestures that the</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">STEP-DAUGHTER</span>, <i>though she has
her hand to her mouth, cannot keep from laughing</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> (<i>indignant</i>). I'm not going to stop here to be
made a fool of by that woman there.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. Neither am I! I'm through with it!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>shouting to Step-Daughter</i>). Silence! for once
and all, I tell you!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Forgive me! forgive me!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You haven't any manners: that's what it is! You
go too far.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>endeavouring to intervene</i>). Yes, it's true,
but excuse her....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Excuse what? It's absolutely disgusting.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, sir, but believe me, it has such a strange
effect when....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Strange? Why strange? Where is it strange?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, sir; I admire your actors—this gentleman
here, this lady; but they are certainly not us!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I should hope not. Evidently they cannot be
you, if they are actors.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Just so: actors! Both of them act our parts
exceedingly well. But, believe me, it produces quite a
different effect on us. They want to be us, but they aren't,
all the same.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What is it then anyway?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Something that is ... that is theirs—and no
longer ours....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But naturally, inevitably. I've told you so
already.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Yes, I understand ... I understand....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well then, let's have no more of it! (<i>Turning
to the actors</i>): We'll have the rehearsals by ourselves,
afterwards, in the ordinary way. I never could stand
rehearsing with the author present. He's never satisfied!
(<i>Turning to Father and Step-Daughter</i>): Come on! Let's get
on with it again; and try and see if you can't keep from
laughing.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Oh, I shan't laugh any more. There's a
nice little bit coming for me now: you'll see.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well then: when she says "Don't think any more
of what I've said. I must forget, etc.," you (<i>addressing
the Father</i>) come in sharp with "I understand, I
understand"; and then you ask her....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>interrupting</i>). What?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Why she is in mourning.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Not at all! See here: when I told him
that it was useless for me to be thinking about my wearing
mourning, do you know how he answered me? "Ah well," he said
"then let's take off this little frock."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Great! Just what we want, to make a riot in the
theatre!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. But it's the truth!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What does that matter? Acting is our business
here. Truth up to a certain point, but no further.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. What do you want to do then?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You'll see, you'll see! Leave it to me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. No sir! What you want to do is to piece
together a little romantic sentimental scene out of my
disgust, out of all the reasons, each more cruel and viler
than the other, why I am what I am. He is to ask me why I'm
in mourning; and I'm to answer with tears in my eyes, that
it is just two months since papa died. No sir, no! He's got
to say to me; as he did say: "Well, let's take off this
little dress at once." And I; with my two months' mourning
in my heart, went there behind that screen, and with these
fingers tingling with shame....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>running his hands through his hair</i>). For
Heaven's sake! What are you saying?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>crying out excitedly</i>). The truth! The
truth!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It may be. I don't deny it, and I can
understand all your horror; but you must surely see that you
can't have this kind of thing on the stage. It won't go.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Not possible, eh? Very well! I'm much
obliged to you—but I'm off!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Now be reasonable! Don't lose your temper!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. I won't stop here! I won't! I can see
you've fixed it all up with him in your office. All this
talk about what is possible for the stage ... I understand!
He wants to get at his complicated "cerebral drama," to have
his famous remorses and torments acted; but I want to act my
part, <i>my part</i>!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>annoyed, shaking his shoulders</i>). Ah! Just
<i>your</i> part! But, if you will pardon me, there are other
parts than yours: His (<i>indicating the Father</i>) and hers
(<i>indicating the Mother</i>)! On the stage you can't have a
character becoming too prominent and overshadowing all the
others. The thing is to pack them all into a neat little
framework and then act what is actable. I am aware of the
fact that everyone has his own interior life which he wants
very much to put forward. But the difficulty lies in this
fact: to set out just so much as is necessary for the stage,
taking the other characters into consideration, and at the
same time hint at the unrevealed interior life of each. I am
willing to admit, my dear young lady, that from your point
of view it would be a fine idea if each character could tell
the public all his troubles in a nice monologue or a regular
one hour lecture (<i>good humoredly</i>). You must restrain
yourself, my dear, and in your own interest, too; because
this fury of yours, this exaggerated disgust you show, may
make a bad impression, you know. After you have confessed to
me that there were others before him at Madame Pace's and
more than once....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>bowing her head, impressed</i>). It's true.
But remember those others mean him for me all the same.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>not understanding</i>). What? The others? What do
you mean?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. For one who has gone wrong, sir, he who
was responsible for the first fault is responsible for all
that follow. He is responsible for my faults, was, even
before I was born. Look at him, and see if it isn't true!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well, well! And does the weight of so much
responsibility seem nothing to you? Give him a chance to act
it, to get it over!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. How? How can he act all his "noble
remorses" all his "moral torments," if you want to spare him
the horror of being discovered one day—after he had asked
her what he did ask her—in the arms of her, that already
fallen woman, that child, sir, that child he used to watch
come out of school? (<i>She is moved</i>).</p>
<p>(<span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> <i>at this point is overcome with emotion, and
breaks out into a fit of crying. All are touched. A long
pause</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>as soon as the Mother becomes a little
quieter, adds resolutely and gravely</i>). At present, we are
unknown to the public. Tomorrow, you will act us as you
wish, treating us in your own manner. But do you really want
to see drama, do you want to see it flash out as it really
did?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Of course! That's just what I do want, so I can
use as much of it as is possible.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Well then, ask that Mother there to leave
us.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>changing her low plaint into a sharp cry</i>). No!
No! Don't permit it, sir, don't permit it!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But it's only to try it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. I can't bear it. I can't.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But since it has happened already ... I don't
understand!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. It's taking place now. It happens all the time.
My torment isn't a pretended one. I live and feel every
minute of my torture. Those two children there—have you
heard them speak? They can't speak any more. They cling to
me to keep my torment actual and vivid for me. But for
themselves, they do not exist, they aren't any more. And she
(<i>indicating Step-Daughter</i>) has run away, she has left me,
and is lost. If I now see her here before me, it is only to
renew for me the tortures I have suffered for her too.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. The eternal moment! She (<i>indicating the
Step-Daughter</i>) is here to catch me, fix me, and hold me
eternally in the stocks for that one fleeting and shameful
moment of my life. She can't give it up! And you sir, cannot
either fairly spare me it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I never said I didn't want to act it. It will
form, as a matter of fact, the nucleus of the whole first
act right up to her surprise (<i>indicates the Mother</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Just so! This is my punishment: the passion in
all of us that must culminate in her final cry.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. I can hear it still in my ears. It's
driven me mad, that cry!—You can put me on as you like; it
doesn't matter. Fully dressed, if you like—provided I have
at least the arm bare; because, standing like this (<i>she
goes close to the Father and leans her head on his breast</i>)
with my head so, and my arms round his neck, I saw a vein
pulsing in my arm here; and then, as if that live vein had
awakened disgust in me, I closed my eyes like this, and let
my head sink on his breast. (<i>Turning to the Mother</i>). Cry
out mother! Cry out! (<i>Buries head in Fathers breast, and
with her shoulders raised as if to prevent her hearing the
cry, adds in tones of intense emotion</i>): Cry out as you did
then!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>coming forward to separate them</i>). No! My
daughter, my daughter! (<i>And after having pulled her away
from him</i>): You brute! you brute! She is my daughter! Don't
you see she's my daughter?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>walking backwards towards footlights</i>). Fine!
fine! Damned good! And then, of course—curtain!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>going towards him excitedly</i>). Yes, of course,
because that's the way it really happened.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>convinced and pleased</i>). Oh, yes, no doubt
about it. Curtain here, curtain!</p>
<p>(<i>At the reiterated cry of</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>, <span style="font-size: 0.8em;">THE MACHINIST</span> <i>lets
the curtain down, leaving</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> <i>and</i> <span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> <i>in
front of it before the footlights</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. The darned idiot! I said "curtain" to show the
act should end there, and he goes and lets it down in
earnest (<i>to the Father, while he pulls the curtain back to
go on to the stage again</i>). Yes, yes, it's all right. Effect
certain! That's the right ending. I'll guarantee the first
act at any rate.</p>
</blockquote>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h4>ACT III.</h4>
<blockquote>
<p><i>When the curtain goes up again, it is seen that the stage
hands have shifted the bit of scenery used in the last part,
and have rigged up instead at the back of the stage a drop,
with some trees, and one or two wings. A portion of a
fountain basin is visible. The Mother is sitting on the
Right with the two children by her side. The Son is on the
same side, but away from the others. He seems bored, angry,
and full of shame. The Father and The Step-Daughter are also
seated towards the Right front. On the other side (Left) are
the actors, much in the positions they occupied before the
curtain was lowered. Only the Manager is standing up in the
middle of the stage, with his hand closed over his mouth in
the act of meditating.</i></p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>shaking his shoulders after a brief pause</i>).
Ah yes: the second act! Leave it to me, leave it all to me
as we arranged, and you'll see! It'll go fine!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Our entry into his house (<i>indicates
Father</i>) in spite of him (<i>indicates the Son</i>)....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>out of patience</i>). Leave it to me, I tell you!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Do let it be clear, at any rate, that it
is in spite of my wishes.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>from her corner, shaking her head</i>). For all
the good that's come of it....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>turning towards her quickly</i>). It
doesn't matter. The more harm done us, the more remorse for
him.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>impatiently</i>). I understand! Good Heavens! I
understand! I'm taking it into account.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>supplicatingly</i>). I beg you, sir, to let it
appear quite plain that for conscience sake I did try in
every way....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>interrupting indignantly and continuing
for the Mother</i>) ... to pacify me, to dissuade me from
spiting him. (<i>To Manager</i>). Do as she wants: satisfy her,
because it is true! I enjoy it immensely. Anyhow, as you can
see, the meeker she is, the more she tries to get at his
heart, the more distant and aloof does he become.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Are we going to begin this second act or not?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. I'm not going to talk any more now. But I
must tell you this: you can't have the whole action take
place in the garden, as you suggest. It isn't possible!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Why not?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Because he (<i>indicates the Son again</i>) is
always shut up alone in his room. And then there's all the
part of that poor dazed-looking boy there which takes place
indoors.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Maybe! On the other hand, you will
understand—we can't change scenes three or four times in
one act.</p>
<p>THE <span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. They used to once.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, when the public was up to the level of
that child there.</p>
<p>THE <span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span>. It makes the illusion easier.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>irritated</i>). The illusion! For Heaven's sake,
don't say illusion. Please don't use that word, which is
particularly painful for us.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>astounded</i>). And why, if you please?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. It's painful, cruel, really cruel; and you ought
to understand that.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But why? What ought we to say then? The
illusion, I tell you, sir, which we've got to create for the
audience....</p>
<p>THE <span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING MAN</span>. With our acting.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. The illusion of a reality.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I understand; but you, perhaps, do not
understand us. Forgive me! You see ... here for you and your
actors, the thing is only—and rightly so ... a kind of
game....</p>
<p>THE <span style="font-size: 0.8em">LEADING LADY</span> (<i>interrupting indignantly</i>). A game! We're
not children here, if you please! We are serious actors.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I don't deny it. What I mean is the game, or
play, of your art, which has to give, as the gentleman says,
a perfect illusion of reality.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Precisely—!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Now, if you consider the fact that we
(<i>indicates himself and the other five Characters</i>), as we
are, have no other reality outside of this illusion....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>astonished, looking at his actors, who are
also amazed</i>). And what does that mean?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>after watching them for a moment with a wan
smile</i>). As I say, sir, that which is a game of art for you
is our sole reality. (<i>Brief pause. He goes a step or two
nearer the Manager and adds</i>): But not only for us, you
know, by the way. Just you think it over well. (<i>Looks him
in the eyes</i>). Can you tell me who you are?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>perplexed, half smiling</i>). What? Who am I? I
am myself.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. And if I were to tell you that that isn't true,
because you are I...?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. I should say you were mad—! (<i>The actors
laugh</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. You're quite right to laugh: because we are all
making believe here (<i>to Manager</i>). And you can therefore
object that it's only for a joke that that gentleman there
(<i>indicates the Leading Man</i>), who naturally is himself, has
to be me, who am on the contrary myself—this thing you see
here. You see I've caught you in a trap! (<i>The actors
laugh</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>annoyed</i>). But we've had all this over once
before. Do you want to begin again?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. No, no! That wasn't my meaning! In fact, I
should like to request you to abandon this game of art
(<i>looking at the Leading Lady as if anticipating her</i>) which
you are accustomed to play here with your actors, and to ask
you seriously once again: who are you?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>astonished and irritated, turning to his
actors</i>). If this fellow here hasn't got a nerve! A man who
calls himself a character comes and asks me who I am!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>with dignity, but not offended</i>). A character,
sir, may always asks a man who he is. Because a character
has really a life of his own, marked with his especial
characteristics; for which reason he is always "somebody."
But a man—I'm not speaking of you now—may very well be
"nobody."</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, but you are asking these questions of me,
the boss, the manager! Do you understand?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. But only in order to know if you, as you really
are now, see yourself as you once were with all the
illusions that were yours then, with all the things both
inside and outside of you as they seemed to you—as they
were then indeed for you. Well, sir, if you think of all
those illusions that mean nothing to you now, of all those
things which don't even <i>seem</i> to you to exist any more,
while once they <i>were</i> for you, don't you feel that—I won't
say these boards—but the very earth under your feet is
sinking away from you when you reflect that in the same way
this <i>you</i> as you feel it today—all this present reality of
yours—is fated to seem a mere illusion to you tomorrow?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>without having understood much, but astonished
by the specious argument</i>). Well, well! And where does all
this take us anyway?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Oh, nowhere! It's only to show you that if we
(<i>indicating the Characters</i>) have no other reality beyond
the illusion, you too must not count overmuch on your
reality as you feel it today, since, like that of yesterday,
it may prove an illusion for you tomorrow.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>determining to make fun of him</i>). Ah,
excellent! Then you'll be saying next that you, with this
comedy of yours that you brought here to act, are truer and
more real than I am.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>with the greatest seriousness</i>). But of course;
without doubt!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Ah, really?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Why, I thought you'd understand that from the
beginning.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. More real than I?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. If your reality can change from one day to
another....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. But everyone knows it can change. It is always
changing, the same as anyone else's.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>with a cry</i>). No, sir, not ours! Look here!
That is the very difference! Our reality doesn't change: it
can't change! It can't be other than what it is, because it
is already fixed for ever. It's terrible. Ours is an
immutable reality which should make you shudder when you
approach us if you are really conscious of the fact that
your reality is a mere transitory and fleeting illusion,
taking this form today and that tomorrow, according to the
conditions, according to your will, your sentiments, which
in turn are controlled by an intellect that shows them to
you today in one manner and tomorrow ... who knows how?...
Illusions of reality represented in this fatuous comedy of
life that never ends, nor can ever end! Because if tomorrow
it were to end ... then why, all would be finished.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Oh for God's sake, will you <i>at least</i> finish
with this philosophizing and let us try and shape this
comedy which you yourself have brought me here? You argue
and philosophize a bit too much, my dear sir. You know you
seem to me almost, almost.... (<i>Stops and looks him over
from head to foot</i>). Ah, by the way, I think you introduced
yourself to me as a—what shall ... we say—a "character,"
created by an author who did not afterward care to make a
drama of his own creations.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. It is the simple truth, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Nonsense! Cut that out, please! None of us
believes it, because it isn't a thing, as you must recognize
yourself, which one can believe seriously. If you want to
know, it seems to me you are trying to imitate the manner of
a certain author whom I heartily detest—I warn
you—although I have unfortunately bound myself to put on
one of his works. As a matter of fact, I was just starting
to rehearse it, when you arrived. (<i>Turning to the actors</i>):
And this is what we've gained—out of the frying-pan into
the fire!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I don't know to what author you may be alluding,
but believe me I feel what I think; and I seem to be
philosophizing only for those who do not think what they
feel, because they blind themselves with their own
sentiment. I know that for many people this self-blinding
seems much more "human"; but the contrary is really true.
For man never reasons so much and becomes so introspective
as when he suffers; since he is anxious to get at the cause
of his sufferings, to learn who has produced them, and
whether it is just or unjust that he should have to bear
them. On the other hand, when he is happy, he takes his
happiness as it comes and doesn't analyse it, just as if
happiness were his right. The animals suffer without
reasoning about their sufferings. But take the case of a man
who suffers and begins to reason about it. Oh no! it can't
be allowed! Let him suffer like an animal, and then—ah yes,
he is "human!"</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Look here! Look here! You're off again,
philosophizing worse than ever.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Because I suffer, sir! I'm not philosophizing:
I'm crying aloud the reason of my sufferings.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>makes brusque movement as he is taken with a
new idea</i>). I should like to know if anyone has ever heard
of a character who gets right out of his part and perorates
and speechifies as you do. Have you ever heard of a case? I
haven't.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. You have never met such a case, sir, because
authors, as a rule, hide the labour of their creations. When
the characters are really alive before their author, the
latter does nothing but follow them in their action, in
their words, in the situations which they suggest to him;
and he has to will them the way they will themselves—for
there's trouble if he doesn't. When a character is born, he
acquires at once such an independence, even of his own
author, that he can be imagined by everybody even in many
other situations where the author never dreamed of placing
him; and so he acquires for himself a meaning which the
author never thought of giving him.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, yes, I know this.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. What is there then to marvel at in us? Imagine
such a misfortune for characters as I have described to you:
to be born of an author's fantasy, and be denied life by
him; and then answer me if these characters left alive, and
yet without life, weren't right in doing what they did do
and are doing now, after they have attempted everything in
their power to persuade him to give them their stage life.
We've all tried him in turn, I, she (<i>indicating the
Step-Daughter</i>) and she (<i>indicating the Mother</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It's true. I too have sought to tempt
him, many, many times, when he has been sitting at his
writing table, feeling a bit melancholy, at the twilight
hour. He would sit in his armchair too lazy to switch on the
light, and all the shadows that crept into his room were
full of our presence coming to tempt him. (<i>As if she saw
herself still there by the writing table, and was annoyed by
the presence of the actors</i>): Oh, if you would only go away,
go away and leave us alone—mother here with that son of
hers—I with that Child—that Boy there always alone—and
then I with him (<i>just hints at the Father</i>)—and then I
alone, alone ... in those shadows! (<i>Makes a sudden movement
as if in the vision she has of herself illuminating those
shadows she wanted to seize hold of herself</i>). Ah! my life!
my life! Oh, what scenes we proposed to him—and I tempted
him more than any of the others!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Maybe. But perhaps it was your fault that he
refused to give us life: because you were too insistent, too
troublesome.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Nonsense! Didn't he make me so himself?
(<i>Goes close to the Manager to tell him as if in
confidence</i>). In my opinion he abandoned us in a fit of
depression, of disgust for the ordinary theatre as the
public knows it and likes it.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Exactly what it was, sir; exactly that!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Not at all! Don't believe it for a minute.
Listen to me! You'll be doing quite right to modify, as you
suggest, the excesses both of this girl here, who wants to
do too much, and of this young man, who won't do anything at
all.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. No, nothing!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You too get over the mark occasionally, my dear
sir, if I may say so.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I? When? Where?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Always! Continuously! Then there's this
insistence of yours in trying to make us believe you are a
character. And then too, you must really argue and
philosophize less, you know, much less.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Well, if you want to take away from me the
possibility of representing the torment of my spirit which
never gives me peace, you will be suppressing me: that's
all. Every true man, sir, who is a little above the level of
the beasts and plants does not live for the sake of living,
without knowing how to live; but he lives so as to give a
meaning and a value of his own to life. For me this is
<i>everything</i>. I cannot give up this, just to represent a
mere fact as she (<i>indicating the Step-Daughter</i>) wants.
It's all very well for her, since her "vendetta" lies in the
"fact." I'm not going to do it. It destroys my <i>raison
d'être</i>.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Your <i>raison d'être!</i> Oh, we're going ahead
fine! First she starts off, and then you jump in. At this
rate, we'll never finish.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. Now, don't be offended! Have it your own
way—provided, however, that within the limits of the parts
you assign us each one's sacrifice isn't too great.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. You've got to understand that you can't go on
arguing at your own pleasure. Drama is action, sir, action
and not confounded philosophy.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. All right. I'll do just as much arguing and
philosophizing as everybody does when he is considering his
own torments.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. If the drama permits! But for Heaven's sake,
man, let's get along and come to the scene.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It seems to me we've got too much action
with our coming into his house (<i>indicating Father</i>). You
said, before, you couldn't change the scene every five
minutes.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Of course not. What we've got to do is to
combine and group up all the facts in one simultaneous,
close-knit, action. We can't have it as you want, with your
little brother wandering like a ghost from room to room,
hiding behind doors and meditating a project which—what did
you say it did to him?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Consumes him, sir, wastes him away!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well, it may be, And then at the same time, you
want the little girl there to be playing in the garden ...
one in the house, and the other in the garden: isn't that
it?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Yes, in the sun, in the sun! That is my
only pleasure: to see her happy and careless in the garden
after the misery and squalor of the horrible room where we
all four slept together. And I had to sleep with her—I, do
you understand?—with my vile contaminated body next to
hers; with her folding me fast in her loving little arms. In
the garden, whenever she spied me, she would run to take me
by the hand. She didn't care for the big flowers, only the
little ones; and she loved to show me them and pet me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well then, we'll have it in the garden.
Everything shall happen in the garden; and we'll group the
other scenes there. (<i>Calls a stage hand</i>). Here, a
back-cloth with trees and something to do as a fountain
basin. (<i>Turning round to look at the back of the stage</i>).
Ah, you've fixed it up. Good! (<i>To Step-Daughter</i>). This is
just to give an idea, of course. The Boy, instead of hiding
behind the doors, will wander about here in the garden,
hiding behind the trees. But it's going to be rather
difficult to find a child to do that scene with you where
she shows you the flowers. (<i>Turning to the Youth</i>). Come
forward a little, will you please? Let's try it now! Come
along! come along! (<i>Then seeing him come shyly forward,
full of fear and looking lost</i>). It's a nice business, this
lad here. What's the matter with him? We'll have to give him
a word or two to say. (<i>Goes close to him, puts a hand on
his shoulders, and leads him behind one of the trees</i>). Come
on! come on! Let me see you a little! Hide here ... yes,
like that. Try and show your head just a little as if you
were looking for someone.... (<i>Goes back to observe the
effect, when the Boy at once goes through the action</i>).
Excellent! fine! (<i>Turning to Step-Daughter</i>). Suppose the
little girl there were to surprise him as he looks round,
and run over to him, so we could give him a word or two to
say?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. It's useless to hope he will speak, as
long as that fellow there is here.... (<i>Indicates the Son</i>).
You must send him away first.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>jumping up</i>.) Delighted! delighted! I don't ask
for anything better. (<i>Begins to move away</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>at once stopping him</i>). No! No! Where are you
going? Wait a bit!</p>
<p>(<i>The Mother gets up alarmed and terrified at the thought
that he is really about to go away. Instinctively she lifts
her arms to prevent him, without, however, leaving her
seat</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>to Manager who stops him</i>). I've got nothing to do
with this affair. Let me go please! Let me go!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. What do you mean by saying you've got nothing
to do with this?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>calmly, with irony</i>). Don't bother to
stop him: he won't go away.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. He has to act the terrible scene in the garden
with his mother.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>suddenly resolute and with dignity</i>). I shall act
nothing at all. I've said so from the very beginning (<i>to
the Manager</i>). Let me go!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span> (<i>going over to the Manager</i>). Allow me?
(<i>Puts down the Manager's arm which is restraining the
Son</i>). Well, go away then, if you want to! (<i>The Son looks
at her with contempt and hatred. She laughs and says</i>). You
see, he can't, he can't go away! He is obliged to stay here,
indissolubly bound to the chain. If I, who fly off when that
happens which has to happen, because I can't bear him—if I
am still here and support that face and expression of his,
you can well imagine that he is unable to move. He has to
remain here, has to stop with that nice father of his, and
that mother whose only son he is. (<i>Turning to the Mother</i>).
Come on, mother, come along! (<i>Turning to Manager to
indicate her</i>). You see, she was getting up to keep him
back. (<i>To the Mother, beckoning her with her hand</i>). Come
on! come on! (<i>Then to Manager</i>). You can imagine how little
she wants to show these actors of yours what she really
feels; but so eager is she to get near him that.... There,
you see? She is willing to act her part. (<i>And in fact, the
Mother approaches him; and as soon as the Step-Daughter has
finished speaking, opens her arms to signify that she
consents</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>suddenly</i>). No! no! If I can't go away, then I'll
stop here; but I repeat: I act nothing!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>to Manager excitedly</i>). You can force him, sir.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Nobody can force me.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. I can.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE STEP-DAUGHTER</span>. Wait a minute, wait.... First of all, the
baby has to go to the fountain.... (<i>Runs to take the Child
and leads her to the fountain</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Yes, yes of course; that's it. Both at the same
time.</p>
<p>(<i>The second Lady Lead and the Juvenile Lead at this point
separate themselves from the group of actors. One watches
the Mother attentively; the other moves about studying the
movements and manner of the Son whom he will have to act</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>to Manager</i>). What do you mean by both at the same
time? It isn't right. There was no scene between me and her.
(<i>Indicates the Mother</i>). Ask her how it was!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Yes, it's true. I had come into his room....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Into my room, do you understand? Nothing to do with
the garden.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. It doesn't matter. Haven't I told you we've got
to group the action?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>observing the Juvenile Lead studying him</i>). What
do you want?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE JUVENILE LEAD</span>. Nothing! I was just looking at you.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>turning towards the second Lady Lead</i>). Ah! she's
at it too: to re-act her part (<i>indicating the Mother</i>)!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Exactly! And it seems to me that you ought to
be grateful to them for their interest.</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Yes, but haven't you yet perceived that it isn't
possible to live in front of a mirror which not only freezes
us with the image of ourselves, but throws our likeness back
at us with a horrible grimace?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span>. That is true, absolutely true. You must see
that.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to second Lady Lead and Juvenile Lead</i>). He's
right! Move away from them!</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Do as you like. I'm out of this!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Be quiet, you, will you? And let me hear your
mother! (<i>To Mother</i>). You were saying you had entered....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. Yes, into his room, because I couldn't stand it
any longer. I went to empty my heart to him of all the
anguish that tortures me.... But as soon as he saw me come
in....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Nothing happened! There was no scene. I went away,
that's all! I don't care for scenes!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. It's true, true. That's how it was.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well now, we've got to do this bit between you
and him. It's indispensable.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. I'm ready ... when you are ready. If you could
only find a chance for me to tell him what I feel here in my
heart.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>going to Son in a great rage</i>). You'll do this
for your mother, for your mother, do you understand?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>quite determined</i>). I do nothing!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>taking hold of him and shaking him</i>). For God's
sake, do as I tell you! Don't you hear your mother asking
you for a favour? Haven't you even got the guts to be a son?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>taking hold of the Father</i>). No! No! And for God's
sake stop it, or else ... (<i>General agitation. The Mother,
frightened, tries to separate them</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span> (<i>pleading</i>). Please! please!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>not leaving hold of the Son</i>). You've got to
obey, do you hear?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>almost crying from rage</i>). What does it mean, this
madness you've got? (<i>They separate</i>). Have you no decency,
that you insist on showing everyone our shame? I won't do
it! I won't! And I stand for the will of our author in this.
He didn't want to put us on the stage, after all!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Man alive! You came here....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>indicating Father</i>). <i>He</i> did! I didn't!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Aren't you here now?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. It was his wish, and he dragged us along with him.
He's told you not only the things that did happen, but also
things that have never happened at all.</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Well, tell me then what did happen. You went
out of your room without saying a word?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Without a word, so as to avoid a scene!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. And then what did you do?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. Nothing ... walking in the garden.... (<i>hesitates
for a moment with expression of gloom</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>coming closer to him, interested by his
extraordinary reserve</i>). Well, well ... walking in the
garden....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span> (<i>exasperated</i>). Why on earth do you insist? It's
horrible! (<i>The Mother trembles, sobs, and looks towards the
fountain</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>slowly observing the glance and turning
towards the Son with increasing apprehension</i>). The baby?</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. There in the fountain....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>pointing with tender pity to the Mother</i>). She
was following him at the moment....</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>to the Son anxiously</i>). And then you....</p>
<p><span style="font-size:0.8em;">THE SON</span>. I ran over to her; I was jumping in to drag her out
when I saw something that froze my blood ... the boy there
standing stock still, with eyes like a madman's, watching
his little drowned sister, in the fountain! (<i>The
Step-Daughter bends over the fountain to hide the Child. She
sobs</i>). Then.... (<i>A revolver shot rings out behind the
trees where the Boy is hidden</i>).</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MOTHER</span>. (<i>With a cry of terror runs over in that
direction together with several of the actors amid general
confusion</i>).</p>
<p>My son! My son! (<i>Then amid the cries and exclamations one
hears her voice</i>). Help! Help!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span> (<i>pushing the actors aside while they lift up
the Boy and carry him off</i>). Is he really wounded?</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">SOME ACTORS</span>. He's dead! dead!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em;">OTHER ACTORS</span>. No, no, it's only make believe, it's only
pretence!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE FATHER</span> (<i>with a terrible cry</i>). Pretence? Reality, sir,
reality!</p>
<p><span style="font-size: 0.8em">THE MANAGER</span>. Pretence? Reality? To hell with it all! Never
in my life has such a thing happened to me. I've lost a
whole day over these people, a whole day!</p>
<p><i>Curtain.</i></p>

